{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "content": "During the period 1880 to 1914, the whole of West Africa, with the sole exception of Liberia (see Chapter 2), was brought under colonial rule. This phenomenon which meant essentially the loss of African sovereignty and independence as well as land, was accomplished in two phases. The first phase lasted from 1880 to the early 1900s, and the second from the early 1900s to the outbreak of the First World War in 1914. Each of these phases saw different European activities which produced different initiatives and reactions on the part of the Africans. It should be emphasized that these reactions were very much determined by the local African situation. Variables included the nature of the polity (whether or not centralized, whether or not dominated by another African power, and whether or not on the upswing or settled and declining), 1 the nature of the leadership provided, the extent of the penetration of European political, religious and economic influences by the 1870s and the experiences gained from this. Another equally important variable was the method adopted by the European imperialists in the establishment of their control over the area between 1880 and 1914."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "content": "The first phase saw either the use of diplomacy or military invasion, or both, by the Europeans. This was the classical era of treaty-making in practically every nook and corner of West Africa followed in most cases by military invasions, conquests and occupation by armies of varying sizes and discipline. The period from 1880 to 1900 was the high-water mark of European conquest and occupation of West Africa. Never in the known history of the continent has so much military action been seen and so many invasions and campaigns launched against African states and communities (see Fig. 6.1). Particularly memorable were the French campaigns in the Western Sudan, Ivory Coast and Dahomey (now Benin) between 1880 and 1898, and the British campaigns in Asante (in what is now Ghana), the Niger Delta region (Nigeria) and in Northern Nigeria between 1895 and 1903 (see Fig. 6.2)."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "content": "During this first phase, practically all Africans had the same objectives,that of defending their sovereignty and traditional way of life. It is the strategies or methods adopted that varied. Three options were open to the Africans, that of confrontation, that of alliance and that of acquiescence or submission. The strategy of confrontation involved open warfare, sieges, guerrilla tactics, scorched earth policies as well as diplomacy. As will be seen below, all three options were resorted to. Though three main European powers were involved in the conquest and occupation of West Africa, we shall confine ourselves in this chapter to the two principal ones, namely, Britain and France."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900", "content": "It is quite clear from the available evidence that the French - from 1880 onwards - adopted a policy of extending their control over the whole region from the Senegal first to the Niger and then Chad and linking these areas with their posts on the Guinea coast in Ivory Coast and Dahomey. The execution of this policy was entrusted to officers of the Senegalese area. As one would expect, therefore, in their occupation of West Africa, the French resorted almost exclusively to the method of military conquest rather than the conclusion of treaties of protectorate as the British did. In terms of African reactions, all the options open to them were resorted to, namely, submission, alliance and confrontation. However, as will be seen below, far more of the rulers opted for the strategy of militant confrontation than those of submission and alliance while opposition here was far more protracted than anywhere else in West Africa for two main reasons. The first, as pointed out already, was that the French used the method of military conquest almost exclusively, which consequently evoked militant reaction. The second was that the people were far more Islamized than those of the other areas of West Africa, and as Michael Crowder has pointed out, since 'for Muslim societies of West Africa the imposition of white rule meant submission to the infidel which was intolerable to any good Muslim',$^{2}$ they tended to resist the Europeans with added fervour and tenacity often lacking among nonMuslims. Let us illustrate these general conclusions by a study of the events in Senegambia, the Tukulor and Mandingo empires, in the Baule areas of Ivory Coast and finally in Dahomey."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Senegambia", "content": "In Senegal, where the conquest had been going on since 1854, France had by 1880 obtained firm bases of operations with the annexation of Walo, the northern part of Cayor and Diander. Since i860, a French protectorate had been imposed on the states of Upper Senegal. However meagre these results were, they had not been obtained without difficulties."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Senegambia", "content": "Although expelled from Cayor in 1864 by France, Lat Dior Diop, the Darnel of Cayor, nevertheless chose the strategy of confrontation by con\u203a tinuing the struggle against the French. In 1871, with the defeat of the French by Prussia, the Governor of Senegal abandoned the annexation of Cayor and recognized Lat Dior once again as Darnel. Consequently, friendly relations were established between him and the French administra\u203a tion in Senegal."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Senegambia", "content": "In 1879, the governor, Bri\u0141re de l'Isle, obtained permission from the Darnel to build a road connecting Dakar with Saint-Louis. But when Lat Dior learned in 1881 that a railway was what was actually involved, he declared his opposition to the project. He realized that the railway would bring the independence of Cayor to an end. In 1881, informed that construction was about to begin, he took steps to prevent it. Orders were issued to all the chiefs to punish severely any Cayor subject who supplied anything whatsoever to the French workmen.$^{3}$ Thereafter, emissaries were dispatched to Ely, the emir of Trarza, Abdul Bokar Kane of Futa Toro and Alboury N'Diaye of Djoloff. Lat Dior invited them to join a holy alliance and to synchronize their struggle in order to facilitate the eviction of the French from the land of their forefathers. 4On 17 November 1882 he sent a letter to Governor Servatius, forbidding him to begin construction even in the suburbs of the territory that was an integral part of Cayor. 'As long as I live, be well assured', he wrote, 'I shall oppose with all my might the construction of this railway ... The sight of sabres and lances is pleasing to our eyes. That is why every time I receive a letter from you concerning the railway, I will always answer no, no and I will never make you any other reply. Even were I to go to rest, my horse Malay would give you the same answer.'$^{5}$ Nothing could better refute those who regard Lat Dior's position in this matter as merely the caprice of a feudal chieftain without regard for the welfare of his people than these sentiments. Be that as it may, noting the persistency of the governor in carrying out his project, Lat Dior forbade his subjects to cultivate groundnuts. He was convinced that if the French could not obtain groundnuts, they would return home. He also ordered those of his subjects living near the French posts to resettle in the Cayor heart\u203a land. The villages of those who disobeyed these orders were burnt down and their possessions confiscated."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Senegambia", "content": "In December 1882, Colonel Wendling invaded Cayor at the head of an expeditionary column composed chiefly of African riflemen and auxiliaries from the annexed territories. Having fought the French since 1861, Lat Dior knew that he had little chance of defeating them in conventional warfare. He withdrew at Wendling's approach and went to settle in Djoloff. In Cayor, Wendling invested Lat Dior's cousin, Samba Yaya Fall, withpower. In August 1883, he was dismissed and replaced by Samba Laobe Fall, Lat Dior's nephew. The governor was convinced that Lat Dior would never make war on his nephew. He was not mistaken: Lat Dior contrived a compromise with his kinsman who, in 1885, authorized him to return to Cayor."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Senegambia", "content": "In October 1886, Samba Laobe Fall was killed at Tivaouane by a detachment of spahis. Governor Genouille thereupon decided to abolish the title of Darnel. He divided Cayor into six provinces which were entrusted to former captives of the crown.$^{6}$ A decree was also passed expelling Lat Dior from Cayor. When he was notified of this measure, Lat Dior went into a towering rage. He mobilized the 300 partisans who had remained faithful but released from oath all those who were not resolved to die with him, and took to the field against the French and their allies, his former subjects. Lat Dior was firmly resolved to sell his life dearly. He therefore feigned compliance with the expulsion order by heading for Djoloff. By one of his bold counter-marches, he managed to slip undetected into a position between his enemies and the railway. On 27 October 1886, at about 11 a.m., he surprised the French and their allies at the well of Dekhle and inflicted heavy losses on them. He fell there, as did his two sons and eighty of his partisans.$^{7}$ The death of Lat Dior naturally spelled the end of Cayor's independence and facilitated French seizure of the rest of the country."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Tukulor empire", "content": "In the Tukulor empire (see Fig. 6.1), Ahmadu, who succeeded his father, Al Hadj 'Umar, the founder of the empire, was, like most African rulers, determined to ensure the survival of his state and maintain its independence and sovereignty. To achieve these objectives, he chose the strategies of alliance and militant confrontation. However, unlike most of the rulers of the region, he relied more on the former rather than on the latter. Indeed, as will be seen below, from his accession until as late as 1890, he still stuck to his policy of alliance or co-operation with the French and it was only in the last two years that he resorted to warfare."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Tukulor empire", "content": "But that Ahmadu should have chosen these strategies should not sur\u203a prise us since the political and economic realities facing him left him no other alternatives. Politically, right from the beginning of his reign, Ahmadu was forced to fight on three fronts: against his brothers who contested his authority, his subjects - the Bambara, Mandinka, Fulani and others - who deeply detested their new Tukulor masters and sought to recover their independence by force, and against the French. To worsen his plight, not only had the army which his father had used to establish the empire become weakened numerically, numbering only 4000 talib\u00d8s(i.e. students of religion who formed the backbone of 'Umar's army) and 11000 sofas (infantry) by 1866,$^{8}$ but he did not have the same sort of control over it nor could he inspire it to the same extent as his father had been able to do. As one would expect, Ahmadu's immediate concerns, then, were first and foremost to consolidate his own position by dealing with his brothers - indeed in 1872 some of his brothers had tried to over\u203a throw him, and then ensuring the survival of the empire by suppressing the rebellions raging among the subject groups, especially the Bambara. To do this, he needed arms and ammunition as well as financial resources through trade, both of which necessitated friendly relations with the French. Furthermore, most of the talib\u00d8s were recruited from Futa Toro, the homeland of his father, and, as this area was under the French, he had to win their co-operation. Confronted with all these internal problems as he was, is it surprising that soon after his accession he agreed to negotiate with the French? The negotiations took place between him and Lieutenant Mage, the representative of the French. Both agreed that in return for the supply of cannon and for the recognition of his authority, Ahmadu was to allow French traders to operate in his empire. 9Though this treaty was not ratified by the French administration nor did Ahmadu receive any cannon, and though the French continued to assist the rebels and in 1878 even attacked Saboucire, the Tukulor fortress in Kuasso, Ahmadu continued his friendly attitude towards the French. This served him well for it enabled him to quell the rebellions of his brothers in 1874, and those in the Bambara territories of Segu and Kaarta by the late 1870s. He therefore readily agreed when the French who, in their preparation to conquer the area between the Senegal and the Niger needed the co-operation of Ahmadu, renewed their request for the re\u203a opening of negotiations in 1880. These negotiations, concluded by Captain Gallieni, led to the treaty of Mango between him and the French. Under the terms of this treaty, Ahmadu undertook to allow the French to build and maintain trade routes through his empire and granted them permission to build and sail steamboats on the Niger. In return, the French recognized the sovereign existence of his empire, agreed to grant him free access to Futa, and promised not to invade his territory or build any fortifications in it. Above all, the French agreed to give in payment four field guns and 1000 rifles, and to pay a yearly rent of 200 rifles, 200 barrels of gunpowder, 200 artillery shells and 50000 flints. 10This treaty was obviously a great diplomatic victory for Ahmadu, and had the French ratified it and sincerely implemented its terms, there is no doubt that Ahmadu's empire would have survived. But of course even Gallieni himself had no intention of implementing the treaty and in any case his government did not ratify it. Under the new Upper Senegalmilitary command headed by Lt.-Colonel Borgnis-Desbordes, the French began their invasion of the empire in 1881 and by February 1883 they had occupied Bamako on the Niger without any opposition. Nor did the Tukulor attack the gunboats launched on the Niger in 1884. Ahmadu's only reaction was to forbid the sale of any item whatsoever to the French. 1 1 In 1884, at the head of an imposing army, Ahmadu went up the Niger towards Bamako. However, contrary to all expectations, he suddenly headed for Kaarta not to attack or threaten the fragile lines of communication of the French but rather to besiege Nioro, the capital of Kaarta with a view to deposing his brother Moutaga, its king whom he considered as too independent of the central authority. ' 2It is obvious from Ahmadu's attack on his brother rather than on the French, and the fact that the Bambara of the district of Beledugu near Bamako were still in rebellion, that he was still not fully in control in his own territory and that he still needed the support of the French. This surely must account for his reaction to the French invasions between 1881 and 1883. His need for French co-operation was further strengthened by the fact that the siege of Nioro further depleted his military resources. The French, on their part, were also desperate for an alliance with Ahmadu. Between 1885 and 1888, they were engaged in the suppression of the rebellion of the Soninke leader Mamadou Lamine and they were most anxious therefore to prevent any alliance between him and Ahmadu. Hence, although Ahmadu was aware that the French were still aiding the Bambara rebels, he nevertheless agreed to conclude another treaty, the Treaty of Gori, on 12 May 1887. Under its terms, Ahmadu agreed to place his empire under the nominal protection of the French while the French in turn pledged not to invade his territories and to remove the ban that they had placed on the purchase of arms by Ahmadu."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Tukulor empire", "content": "However, by 1888, the French had suppressed Lamine's rebellion and, as will be seen later, concluded another treaty with Samori and therefore did not need an alliance with Ahmadu any longer. This together with the aggressiveness of the French military command led to the assumption of the offensive against Ahmadu signified by their attack on the Tukulor fortress - of Kundian - 'that troublesome obstacle on the road to Siguiri and Dinguiray' in February 1889.$^{13}$ The operation was not concluded with all the speed desired. The 'tata' was very solidly built with double walls of masonry while the garrison had removed the thatch roofing to prevent the rapid spread of fire. It took an intensive bombardment of eight hours' duration by Archinard's 80-mm mountain guns to breach the walls. The Tukulor, who had held fast under this deluge, put up a fierce resistance to the French, meeting their bombardment with con-tinued musket fire followed by a house-to-house fight. Many of them perished with their weapons in their hands. 14Ahmadu, at grips with his internal difficulties, thereupon transferred the struggle to the religious plane. He appealed to all the Muslims of the empire to take up arms in defence of the faith. Letters requesting help were dispatched to Djoloff, Mauritania and Futa.$^{15}$ These steps failed to produce satisfactory results, and Archinard, after careful prepara\u203a tion and the acquisition of adequate arms including 'two 95 mm fieldguns with 100 of the latest melinite shells',$^{16}$ seized the capital of the empire in April 1890. From there he marched against the fortress of Ouessebougou, defended by the Bambara loyal to Ahmadu. All of them were slain in battle though not without inflicting heavy losses on their assailants. Two of the twenty-seven Europeans were killed and eight of them were wounded while thirteen African soldiers were killed and 876 wounded. From there, Archinard captured Koniakary after having beaten the Tukulor resistance put up against him. Faced with the stubborn resistance of the Tukulor garrisons, Archinard called a halt and requested Ahmadu to capitulate and to go and settle in a Dinguiray village as a mere private individual."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Tukulor empire", "content": "It was not until this point that Ahmadu abandoned his weapon of diplomacy in favour of a military one. In June 1890, his soldiers attacked the railway at Talaari and engaged the French in numerous skirmishes between Kayes and Bafulabe. In one of them, the French lost forty-three killed and wounded out of a force of 125. In September, taking advantage of the isolation of Koniakary by flood, they attempted but failed to reconquer it. 17Ahmadu was, however, also preparing to defend Nioro. He divided his troops into four groups with the main body concentrating around Nioro under the command of the Bambara general Bafi and the former king of Djoloff, Alboury N'Diaye.$^{18}$ On 23 December 1890, Bassiru's army was routed by the French using their 80-mm and 95-mm guns, and on 1 January 1891, Archinard entered Nioro. Alboury's attempt to retake Nioro on 3 January 1891 failed after the Tukulor army had been routed. The Sultan lost more than 3000 killed or taken prisoner. He retreated to Macina, which he left after the hard-fought battle of KoriKori. Even in exile in Hausa territory, he maintained an attitude of 'un\u203a compromising independence' toward the French. J 9Unlike Ahmadu, Samori Ture chose the strategy of confrontation, not of alliance, though he used the weapons of both diplomacy and warfare but with the emphasis on the latter. By 1881, Samori had already moulded 'the southern part of the Sudanese savannas all along the great West African forest' between the northern parts of modern Sierra Leone to the Sassandra River in the Ivory Coast, into a single empire under his unquestioned authority$^{20}$ (see Fig. 6.1). Unlike the Tukulor empire, the Mandingo empire was still in the ascendant by 1882 when the first encounter between Samori and the French occurred. The conquest of the area had also enabled Samori to build a powerful army relatively well equipped with European arms. This army was divided into two wings, the infantry wing (the sofa) which by 1887 numbered between 30000 and 35000 men, and the cavalry wing numbering no more than 3000 by 1887. The infantry was divided into permanent units of ten to twenty men known as the s\u00d8 (feet) or kulu (heaps) commanded by a kuntigi (chief), and ten s\u00d8 formed a bolo (arm) under the command of a bolokuntigi.$^{21}$ The cavalry was divided into bands of fifty called s\u0141r\u0141. The bolo formed the main striking force while a s\u0141r\u0141 rode alongside each bolo. Since each of these units was per\u203a manent, its members developed feelings of friendship first among them\u203a selves and of loyalty first to their local leader and then to Samori. Thus the army soon assumed 'a quasi-national character because it achieved a very remarkable homogeneity'.$^{22}$ But the unique features of Samori's army were its weapons and training. Unlike most of the armies of West Africa, not only was this army virtually professional, but it was armed by Samori himself. Up to 1876, he armed them with old guns which the local blacksmiths could repair themselves. But from 1876 onwards he also began to order more modern European weapons, mainly from Sierra Leone, and carefully studied them to find those that were most suitable for his area. Thus from 1885, he replaced the Chassepot rifles, whose large cartridges soon rotted in humid conditions, with the more suitable Gras rifles with lighter cartridges, and Kropatscheks which were Gras repeater rifles. He continued to rely on these types until the 1880s since he was able to train a group of blacksmiths who could effectively manufacture copies. From 1888, he also added to his stock some of the new quickfiring rifles and by 1893 he had about 6000 of them which he used until his defeat in 1898. However, he never acquired any artillery which was a great handicap in his campaigns against the French. Arms purchases were financed from the sale of ivory and gold mined from the old medieval goldfields of Bure in the south and from the exchange of slaves for horses in the Sahel and Mossi regions. The army was, however, not only wellarmed but also well trained and disciplined and it developed a high level of esprit de corps and homogeneity."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Samori and the French", "content": "It is evident, then, that Samori was virtually at the height of his power when he first came into contact with the French in 1882. In February of that year he was called upon by Lieutenant Alakamessa who notified him of the order from the Upper Senegal-Niger high command to withdraw from Kenyeran, an important market centre barring Samori's way to the Mandingo areas. As one would expect, Samori refused. This led to a surprise attack on his army by Borgnis-Desbordes who was however forced to beat a hasty retreat. Samori's brother, K\u00d8m\u00d8-Brema, attacked the French at Wenyako near Bamako in April. Though he won the battle on 2 April, he was defeated on 12 April by a much smaller French army. Samori thereupon tried to avoid conflict with the French and directed his action towards Kenedugu."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Samori and the French", "content": "In 1885, when Combes occupied Bure, the gold of which was important to the economy of Samori's empire, Samori realized how great was the threat that hung over his state. He resolved to expel the French from the area by force. Three armies, his own and those of K\u00d8m\u00d8 and MasaraMamadi, were charged with this operation. By a vast pincer movement, Bure was easily recaptured and the French were forced to decamp for fear of being encircled. Samori thereupon decided to cultivate his relations with the British in Sierra Leone. After having occupied Falaba in 1884, he dispatched emissaries to Freetown, to propose to the governor that he place his entire country under the protection of the British government. The offer was a mere manoeuvre on the part of Samori, whose intention was in no way to relinquish his sovereignty but to make the French respect it by allying himself with a powerful government. 23When that move failed, Samori turned to the French and signed a treaty with them on 28 March 1886. He agreed to withdraw his troops to the right bank of the Niger, but maintained his rights over Bure and the Mandingo of Kangaba.$^{24}$ In another treaty with the French on 25 March 1887 which amended that of the previous year, Samori ceded the left bank of the river to the French and even agreed to place his country under French protection."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Samori and the French", "content": "Samori had perhaps signed the second document in the hope that the French would help him against Tieba, the Faama of Sikasso whom he attacked in April 1887 with a 12000-strong army, while the French had signed it because they needed to prevent any alliance between Samori and Mamadou Lamine whom they were then fighting. When he saw that instead of behaving as allies and assisting him, the French were rather encouraging dissidence and rebellion in the areas recently subdued and were attempting to prevent him from obtaining supplies of weaponsfrom Sierra Leone, he raised the siege in August 1888 and prepared to take up arms against the invader.$^{25}$ He reorganized the army, concluded a treaty with the British in Sierra Leone in May 1890 which enabled him to buy modern weapons for the next three years in increasing quantities, and trained his troops in the European manner. Platoons and companies were activated. He adopted defence as his military tactic. Of course, there could be no question of using the 'tatas' for shelter, as there was no chance that they could hold out against artillery. His strategy consisted of endowing his troops with great mobility, so that they could surprise the enemy, inflict heavy losses upon him, and then disappear. 26In March 1890, Archinard captured Segu and in his attempt to defeat Samori before ceding the Upper Senegal-Niger command to Humbert, attacked him in March 1891. Archinard thought that Samori's empire would collapse at the first onslaught. Though that attack resulted in the capturing of Kankan on 7 April and the burning of Bissandugu, its effect was quite the opposite since it not only provided Samori with a salutary warning but it also enabled him to continue the attacks on the French at Kankan and to defeat them at the battle of Dabadugu on 3 September 1891."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Samori and the French", "content": "The major confrontation between the French and Samori, however, took place in 1892. Bent on defeating Samori, Humbert launched an attack on the central part of the Empire in January 1892 with 1300 carefully picked riflemen and 3000 porters. Samori took personal command of his carefully chosen army of 2500 men to meet Humbert. Though these men 'fighting like demons, clung fiercely to every defensive point on the way', to quote Yves Person's words,$^{27}$ they were defeated and Humbert succeeded in capturing Bissandugu, Sanankoro and Kerwane. It is im\u203a portant to note, however, that Humbert himself admitted that the results were very meagre in comparison to the heavy losses that he had sustained. Furthermore, Samori had ordered the civilian population to withdraw at the approach of the French troops."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Samori and the French", "content": "However, Samori had no illusions. After the violent encounters with the Humbert column in which he lost over a thousand men of his elite units as compared with only about a hundred lost by the French, he became convinced of the futility of confronting the French. There were then two options open to him: either to surrender or to withdraw. He ruled out the former and decided to abandon his homeland and move to the east to create a new empire out of the reach of the Europeans. Still continuing his scorched-earth policy, he began his move eastwards towards the Bandama and Comoe rivers. Though in 1894 he lost the last route supplying him with modern weapons - the one to Monrovia - he nevertheless fought on. At the beginning of 1895, he encounteredand beat back a French column coming from the Baule country under the command of Monteil, and between July 1895 and January 1896 went on to conquer the Abron (Gyaman) kingdom and the western part of Gonja. By that time, he had succeeded in creating a new empire in the hinterland of the Ivory Coast and Asante (see Fig. 6.1).$^{28}$ In March 1897, his son Sarankenyi-Mori met and defeated a British column under the command of Henderson near Wa while Samori himself attacked and destroyed Kong in May 1897 and pushed on to Bobo where he encountered a French column under the command of Caudrelier."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Samori and the French", "content": "Caught between the French and the British and having vainly attempted to sow discord between the British and the French by returning to the latter the territory of Bouna coveted by the former, Samori decided to return to his Toma allies in Liberia. On the way, he was captured in a surprise attack at Guelemou by Gouraud on 29 September 1898 and deported to Gabon where he died in 1900. His capture brought to an end what a recent scholar has described as 'the longest series of campaigns against a single enemy in the history of French Sudanese conquest'. 29Behanzin, the king of Dahomey (Abomey), like Samori, chose the strategy of confrontation in defence of the sovereignty and independence of his state.$^{30}$ Direct conflict occurred during the last decade of the nineteenth century when France declared a protectorate over Porto Novo, a vassal of Abomey. This move constituted a serious blow to the economic interests of Abomey. In 1889, the heir to the throne, Prince Kondo, informed the governor of the Rivi\u0141res de Sud, Bayol, that the Fon people would never accept such a situation. In February 1890, Bayol ordered the occupa\u203a tion of Cotonou and the arrest of all the Fon notables in the town. Prince Kondo, who had begun his reign in December 1889 under the name of Behanzin, reacted by mobilizing his troops. At the time, Abomey had a permanent army which, in peacetime, numbered 4000 men and women. In wartime military service was compulsory for all males, supported by the Amazons, who were dreaded female warriors."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Dahomey", "content": "The French garrison was attacked at dusk, at the same time as part of the army dispatched to the region of Porto Novo set about destroying the palm trees. According to Behanzin, those economic counter-measures quickly induced the French to sue for peace. On 3 October, Father Dorg\u0141re presented himself in Abomey with proposals for peace. In return for the recognition of Cotonou as a French possession and the right of the French to levy custom duties and station a garrison of troops there, the French were to pay Behanzin an annuity of 20000 francs. The king accepted these terms and the treaty was signed on 3 October 1890. However, todefend the rest of his state, the king started to modernize his army. Between January 1891 and August 1892 he purchased, '1,700 rapid-firing rifles, six Krupp cannon of various bore, five machine-guns, 400,000 assorted cartridges and a large quantity of shell'$^{31}$ from German firms operating in Lome."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Dahomey", "content": "However the French were determined to conquer Dahomey and obtained the necessary excuse when the Resident of Porto Novo, who was making a trip up the Werne River in the gunboat Topaz, was fired upon on 27 March 1892 by some Fon soldiers. Colonel Dodds, a Senegalese mulatto, was placed in charge of this mission and arrived at Cotonou in May 1892. Porto Novo, where the French assembled 2000 men, became the centre of operations. Dodds moved his men up the Werne river and, on 4 October, began his march to Abomey. The Fon united all the three divisions of their army of about 12000 strong and moved it against the invading French army between the river and Abomey. However, all the efforts of the Fon soldiers using their traditional methods of surprise dawn attacks, unexpected strikes, defensive stands, harrying invading forces and other guerrilla tactics, failed to halt the French let alone beat them back and they suffered heavy casualties. The losses of the Fon were esti\u203a mated at 2000 dead (including virtually all the Amazons) and 3000 wounded, while that of the French was only 10 officers and 67 men.$^{32}$ But what upset the Fon military plan most was the destruction of the harvest by the Yoruba slaves released by Dodds' army. Abomey was faced with an acute problem of provisions. To avoid starvation, some soldiers went home to search for food and to defend their villages which were being pillaged by the liberated slaves."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > Dahomey", "content": "With the disintegration of the Fon army, the only solution, needless to say, was peace. Dodds encamped at Cana, accepted the proposals of Behanzin, but demanded payment of a heavy war indemnity and the surrender of all weapons. Such conditions were obviously unacceptable to the very dignity of the Fon people. In November 1892, Dodds, continuing his inexorable advance, entered Abomey, which Behanzin had set on fire before heading to the northern part of his kingdom where he settled. Instead of submitting or being deposed by his people as the French had expected, he rather set about reorganizing his army for which he had the full support of his people. In March 1893, he was able to regroup 2000 men who carried out numerous raids in the areas held by the French. In April 1893, the notables made new proposals for peace. They were prepared to cede the southern part of the kingdom to France but could not accept the deposition of Behanzin, in whom they saw the incarnation of the values of their people and the symbol of the independent existence of their state. The French therefore launched another expeditionary forcein September, again under the command of Dodds, now a general, which succeeded in conquering northern Dahomey. Goutchilli was appointed and crowned king on 15 January 1894 and Behanzin was arrested following a betrayal on 29 January 1894. a3It used to be thought that opposition to the French in the forest regions of Guinea and Ivory Coast did not begin until after 1900.$^{34}$ However, recent research especially among the Lagoon people and the Baule of Ivory Coast has revealed that this view is erroneous and that French pene\u203a tration from the coast inland evoked hostile reactions from the people right from the beginning.$^{35}$ The first French missions into the Baule country from the coast were launched by two expeditions, the military expedition of Lieutenants Armand and de Tavernost in February 1891 and the commercial one of Voituret and Papillon in March 1891. Etien Komenan, the chief of the Baule of Tiassal\u00d8, was determined to stop this penetration and refused to give Armand and de Tavernost an inter\u203a preter to accompany them to the north. They were therefore obliged to return to the coast; meanwhile, Etien Komenan had Voituret and Papillon assassinated before they could ever reach Tiassal\u00d8.$^{36}$ To punish the Baule, the French launched a military expedition under the command of Lt Staup but this was attacked by Etien Komenan's forces on 11 May 1891 and forced to beat an ignominious retreat to the coast. When force failed, the French resorted to diplomacy and succeeded in concluding a treaty with the Baule of Tiassal\u00d8 and Niamw\u00d8 on 29 December 1892 under which they agreed to pay a tribute of 100 oz of gold in exchange for free trade with the Africans and Europeans on the coast. It was in the light of this treaty that the French sent their second exploratory mission into Baule country in March 1893 under the command of Jean-Baptiste Marchand who was already well known for his military exploits in the Western Sudan. Halfway up the Bandama en route to Tiassal\u00d8, Marchand encountered the opposition of Etien Komenan who had resolved that 'no white man would pass through Tiassal\u00d8'.$^{37}$ Marchand therefore returned to Grand Lahou and having collected a force of about 120 men, embarked on an invasion of Tiassal\u00d8 on 18 May 1893 which he occupied a week later after Etien Komenan had fled. From there, Marchand resumed his march northwards and in November 1893 entered Gbu\u00d8k\u00d8kro which was later to be renamed Bouak\u00d8 by the French. Here, he was opposed by the chief of the town, Kouassi Gbu\u0141k\u00d8, who was then in alliancewith Samori. Marchand had therefore to press on to Kong from where he sent a strong appeal to Paris to dispatch an expedition to occupy Kong with a view to forestalling both Samori and the British as well as signing a treaty with the Dyula of Kong. It was in response to this appeal that the expedition under Monteil was launched in September 1894, which entered Tiassal\u00d8 in December 1894."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > The Baule and the French", "content": "Monteil's expedition encountered an even more determined resistance from the Baule who revolted and attacked them at Ouossou north of Tiassal\u00d8, at Ahuakro and at Moronou between 25 and 28 December. It was because of this determined Baule opposition that Monteil was ordered to return to the coast in February 1895."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in French West Africa, 1880-1900 > The Baule and the French", "content": "The period from 1895 to 1898 was one of peace in Baule territory. However, after defeating and capturing Samori in September 1898, the French decided to begin an effective occupation of Baule territory, and therefore began to build a permanent military post at Bouak\u00d8 without consulting the Baule. They also began to free slaves and they captured and executed Katia Kofi, the chief of Katiakofikro, for fomenting antiFrench feelings in that area. Mainly as a result of these provocations, the Baule groups in that area once again rose up in rebellion and on 22 December 1898 launched an all-out attack on the French garrisons in that area, led by Kouadio Okou, chief of Lomo; Yao Gui\u00d8, a Ngban chief; Kasso, the brother of the murdered chief of Katiakofikro; Akafou Bulare, another Ngban chief; and Kouam\u00d8 Die, the paramount chief of the Warebo Baule. In reply, the French declared the Baule area a military territory and launched a series of campaigns. These resulted in the capture of the Baule gold-mining centre of Kokumbo from a Baule defence force of 1500 to 2000 men in June 1901, in the capturing and shooting of the great Kouam\u00d8 Die in February 1902 and the capture of Akafou Bulare (Akafou, the Man of Iron) who was beaten to death in his cell in July 1902. But, resorting to guerrilla tactics, the Baule continued to harass the French forces and peace was not restored until Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph Clozel, who became the acting governor of the colony in November 1902, realized the futility of force and ordered a halt to military operations. 38While the French resorted mainly to warfare in their occupation of French West Africa during the period 1880 to 1900, the British, by contrast, used a combination of peaceful diplomacy and warfare. Using the former approach, they concluded a number of treaties of protection with African states as they did in the northern parts of Sierra Leone, the northernparts of the Gold Coast (now Ghana) and in some parts of Yorubaland. In other parts, as in Asante, Ijebu in Yorubaland, in the Niger Delta areas and especially in Northern Nigeria, however, the British by and large used force. In reacting to the British, the peoples of the area in question, like those in French West Africa, resorted to all the options open to them, those of confrontation, alliance and submission or a combination of any of these options. Let us analyse what happened in Asante, Southern Nigeria and in Northern Nigeria as cases in point."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in British West Africa, 1880-1900 > Asante (Gold Coast)", "content": "Nowhere in West Africa had there been a longer tradition of confrontation between Africans and Europeans than in the Gold Coast between the Asante and the British. This started in the 1760s and culminated in a military engagement in 1824 in which the Asante defeated the British forces and their allies and killed their commander, Sir Charles MacCarthy, the then Governor of the Gold Coast.$^{39}$ Two years later, the British avenged this defeat at the battle of Dodowa. In 1850 and 1863 war was narrowly averted but between 1869 and 1872, the Asante launched a three-pronged attack which resulted in the occupation of virtually all the southern and coastal states of the Gold Coast. To beat back the Asante, the British government launched one of the best organized campaigns of the period under the command of one of the most famous British officers of the day, General Garnet Wolseley. Armed with the latest weapons, this army succeeded in pushing the Asante army across the Pra river and entered and sacked Kumasi in February 1874 after a very fierce last-ditch stand by the Asante army at Amoafo near Bekwai. 40This decisive defeat of the Asante by the British in 1874 had very far-reaching consequences and was to influence, to a great extent, the reactions of the Asante during the period 1880-1900. The first obvious effect was the disintegration of the Asante empire. By the Treaty of Fomena, Asante recognized the independence of all the vassal states south of the Pra. Taking advantage of the weakening of the military power of Asante, the vassal states to the north of the Volta river also broke away. Even the core of the empire that remained began to break up. Anxious to see that the Asante empire was never revived, the British instigated some of the member states of the Asante Union to assert their independence, and Dwaben, Kokofu, Bekwai and Nsuta began to defy the Asantehene.$^{4}$ ' The conflict between Kumasi and Dwaben in fact led to a civil war which ended in the defeat of the former and the mass migration of thepeople into the recently proclaimed British Protectorate and Colony of the Gold Coast. Above all, the Asantehene was deposed partly as a result of the outcome of the 1874 war. On the death of his successor only seven years later, a civil war broke out over the succession and it was not until 1888 that Prempeh I emerged as the new Asantehene."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in British West Africa, 1880-1900 > Asante (Gold Coast)", "content": "Fortunately, Prempeh proved equal to the crisis with which he was confronted. Within three years of his succession, he was able to reunite the member states of the Asante Union (or Confederacy) and even to persuade the Dwaben to return home. Alarmed partly by this revival of Asante and partly by the possibility of either the French or the Germans taking over Asante, the British offered to place Asante under their pro\u203a tection. Prempeh's firm but polite rejection of this offer is quoted else\u203a where.$^{42}$ Prempeh followed up this rejection with an invasion and defeat of the Nkoransa, the Mo and the Abease in 1892. In reaction, the British offered to station a British Resident at Kumasi in return for the payment of annual stipends to the Asantehene and his other leading kings. Not only did the Asantehene reject this offer but dispatched a high-powered mission to the Queen of England 'to lay before your Majesty divers matters affecting the good estate of our kingdom'.$^{43}$ This diplomatic mission left Kumasi in November 1894 attended by over three hundred retainers. It entered Cape Coast on 10 December and left for England on 3 April 1895. Not only did the British government refuse to see the Asante mission but, while it was still there, instructed the governor on the coast to issue an ultimatum to the Asantehene to receive a British Resident and pay the war indemnity of 50000 oz of gold imposed on Asante in 1874. Of course, the Asantehene refused to comply with these requests, all the more so since he was awaiting the outcome of the mission to London."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in British West Africa, 1880-1900 > Asante (Gold Coast)", "content": "Using this as an excuse, the British launched a full-scale expedition against Asante under the command of Sir Francis Scott. This expedition entered Kumasi in January 1896 without firing a shot since Prempeh and his advisors had decided not to fight the British but to accept British protection. In spite of this, Prempeh, his mother who was also then the Queen, his uncles and some of the war chiefs were arrested and deported first to Sierra Leone and thence to the Seychelles Islands in 1900. 44 (See Plate 6.2.)Why did the Asante decide not to fight the British on this occasion? Fortunately, we have Prempeh's own answer to this question while he was in exile on the Seychelles Islands. When his chiefs demanded war with the British, Prempeh first recalled the days of the civil war in Kumasi and the role the British had played in bringing about peace as well as his enstoolment and then added: 'through this favour received in the hands of the English Government, I am not prepared to fight the British troops in spite [sic] I am to be captured by them - secondly, I wouldrather surrender to secure the lives and tranquillity of my people and country men.'$^{45}$ ."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and reaction in British West Africa, 1880-1900 > Asante (Gold Coast)", "content": "The unfortunate Prempeh thought that he could break with tradition and use the weapon of diplomacy instead of military confrontation in an age of bitter imperial rivalry. But in view of the experiences of 1874 and the undoubted military superiority enjoyed by the British over Asante, Prempeh's decision was most realistic, sensible and dignified."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Southern Nigeria", "content": "The agencies and methods that the British adopted to bring the whole of modern Nigeria under their control varied, as did the initiatives and reactions on the part of the Nigerians. Yorubaland was won by the mission\u203a aries and the Lagos government; the Oil Rivers by the missionaries and the consuls; and Northern Nigeria by both the National African Company (from 1886 the Royal Niger Company) and the British government. The main weapons used by the British were diplomacy and military confronta\u203a tion. Nigerian reactions therefore varied from open military confrontation to temporary alliances and submission."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Southern Nigeria", "content": "Mainly as a result of the activities of the missionaries, British influence and trade had penetrated from Lagos, occupied in 1851, to most parts of Yorubaland, and a number of anti-slave trade, and trade and protection treaties had been concluded between the British and many Yoruba rulers by 1884. In 1886, the British administration was also able to convince Ibadan and the Ekitiparapo (comprising the Ekiti, Ijesha and Egba), who had been at war since 1879, to sign a peace treaty. That the British had accomplished so much in Yorubaland by 1886 should not surprise us. Apart from the activities of the European traders and missionaries, which had preceded the wars, after fighting among themselves since the 1850s, the Yoruba were themselves war-weary and needed peace; hence their acceptance of the intervention by the British. The only state in Yorubaland that had effectively resisted the missionaries, the British traders, and the Lagos administration, until the 1880s was Ijebu. Bent on occupying Yorubaland from the early 1890s, the British decided to teach Ijebu a lesson and at the same time demonstrate to the remaining Yoruba states the futility of opposing them.$^{46}$ Using an alleged insult to Governor Denton in 1892 as a pretext, the British launched a wellprepared expedition of about 1000 men armed with rifles, machine guns and a Maxim gun. The Ijebu courageously raised an army of between 7000 and 10000 men but in spite of this huge numerical superiority and in spite of the fact that some of them were armed with firearms, they were routed by the invaders.$^{47}$ It would appear that all the remainingYoruba states learnt a lesson from this invasion, and it is not surprising that between 1893 and 1899 Abeokuta, Ibadan, Ekiti-Ijesa and Oyo readily agreed to negotiate treaties and accepted British residents. It was merely to ensure the total submission of the Alafin that the British bombarded Oyo in 1895. Abeokuta remained nominally independent until 1914."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Southern Nigeria", "content": "While the Yoruba, by and large, chose the strategy of submission, the rulers of the kingdom of Benin and some of the rulers of the states of the Niger Delta chose that of confrontation. Though Benin had signed a treaty of protection with the British in 1892, she none the less guarded her sovereignty with determination. This, of course, would not be tolerated in that age, and using the killing of the British acting consul-general and five other Englishmen on their way to Benin as an excuse, the British launched a punitive expedition of 1500 men against Benin in 1897. Though the Oba himself would have liked to submit, a majority of his chiefs raised an army to beat back the invasion. They were, however, defeated and the capital was looted of its precious bronze treasures and then burnt. 48In the Niger Delta, as in many other areas of Nigeria, the British had signed treaties of protection with most of the chiefs by 1884. However, while some, like Calabar and Bonny, had allowed missionaries to operate in their states, others had not. Moreover, all of them were insisting on their sovereign rights to regulate trade and to levy duties on British traders. This, the new British consuls, such as Hewett and Johnston, would not tolerate. A typical example of the rulers who stood up to the British consuls and missionaries was Jaja of Opobo (see Plate 6.3). He insisted on payment of duties by British traders and ordered a complete stoppage of trade in the river until one British firm agreed to pay duties. The consul, Johnston, ordered him to stop levying duties on English traders. But instead of doing so, Jaja dispatched a mission to the Foreign Office to protest against the order. When Jaja still refused to comply in spite of Johnston's threats to bombard his town with British gunboats, Johnston enticed Jaja on board a ship in 1887 under a promise of safeconduct but arrested him and sent him to Accra$^{49}$ where he was tried and deported to the West Indies. The other Delta states - Old Calabar, New Calabar, Brass and Bonny - stunned by this treatment of one of the most powerful and wealthy rulers of the Delta states and divided internally, surrendered and accepted governing councils imposed on them by Johnston."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Southern Nigeria", "content": "Another ruler who defied the British was Nana, the governor of the river in the Itsekiri kingdom. Like Jaja, he insisted on controlling the trade on the Benin river and therefore the British raised an army to seize his capital. The first attempt in April 1894 was repulsed but the second, in September, succeeded. Nana escaped to Lagos where he sur-rendered himself to the British governor who promptly tried him and deported him first to Calabar and then to the Gold Coast. 50If the conquest and occupation of Southern Nigeria was the work of the British government with the assistance of the traders and the mission\u203a aries, that of Northern Nigeria was accomplished by the National African Company (from 1886 the Royal Niger Company - RNC) and the British government, and the main method used, like that of the French in the Western Sudan, was military conquest. This had been preceded by a series of treaties between the rulers of Northern Nigeria and the RNC. These treaties were calculated to secure the area for the British rather than the French or the Germans who were encroaching from the west and east respectively."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and Reaction in Northern Nigeria", "content": "Following the establishment of the principle of effective occupation at the Berlin Conference and to forestall the French and the Germans, the RNC felt compelled to move in. The doors to the north lay through Ilorin and Nupe, both of which were determined to maintain their inde\u203a pendence and sovereignty. Nupe was therefore invaded in 1897. The RNC's force, according to D. J. M. Muffett, 'consisted of Major A. R. Arnold, commanding thirty-one officers and other Europeans, including Sir George Goldie himself, and 507 rank and file formed in seven companies, supported by 565 carriers and one 12-pounder B.L. gun and one 9-pounder B.L. gun (both Whitworth's), five R.M.L. (rifled muzzle loading) 7-pounder guns and six .45 Maxims'.$^{51}$ It was supported by a flotilla consisting of eleven vessels. The Etsu of Nupe and his huge army, estimated at 25000-30000 cavalry and infantry men and armed mainly with the traditional weapons of bows, arrows, spears and swords, put up a spirited fight. Nevertheless, the RNC came out victorious in the end, deposed the Etsu and installed a more pliable one. Nupe was defeated because, as Crowder has pointed out, it failed to realize that 'head-on cavalry charges against rapid-firing rifles, artillery and maxim guns was the worst military strategy possible'.$^{52}$ A similar invasion was launched against Ilorin in the same year. After meeting another spirited defence, the RNC brought Ilorin into subjection."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > Conquest and Reaction in Northern Nigeria", "content": "Surprisingly, other rulers of the north were not intimidated by these victories. On the contrary, apart from that of Zaria, all the other emirs, spurred on by their implacable hatred for the infidel, were determined to die rather than surrender their land and faith. As the Sultan of Sokoto informed Lugard in May 1902, 'Between us and you there are no dealings except as between musulmans and unbelievers ... War as God Almightyhas enjoined on us'.$^{53}$ The British therefore had to launch a series of campaigns - against Kontagora in 1900, Adamawa in 1901, Bauchi in 1902, Kano, Sokoto and Burwuri in 1903.$^{54}$ The rulers of all these emirates rose to the occasion but they had no effective answer to their enemies' Maxim guns, rifles and muzzle-loading 7-pounder cannon and therefore suffered defeat."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14", "content": "As is evident from the above, by 1900, the efforts of the Africans to maintain their sovereignty and independence had been frustrated and the period from 1900 to the outbreak of the First World War saw the intro\u203a duction of various kinds of machinery for the administration and above all, for the exploitation of the newly acquired estates. As Angoulvant, who was appointed Governor of the Ivory Coast in August 1908, put it:What has to be established above all is the indisputable principle of our authority ... On the part of the natives, the acceptance of this principle must be expressed in a deferential welcome and absolute respect for our representatives whoever they may be, in the full payment of taxes at a uniform rate of 2.50 francs, in serious co\u203a operation in the construction of tracks and roads, in the acceptance of paid porterage, in the following of our advice [sic] in regard to labour, in recourse to our justice ... Signs of impatience or disrespect towards our authority, and the deliberate lack of goodwill are to be repressed without delay. 55In all the newly acquired colonies, the objectives outlined here were pur\u203a sued and the methods were applied. District commissioners and travelling commissioners were appointed, new courts were established, new codes and new laws were introduced, chiefs were confirmed or deposed and new ones appointed, direct and indirect taxation was introduced, and forced labour was demanded for the construction of roads and railways. All these measures naturally generated various reactions."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14", "content": "During this second phase, while there were differences in the objectives in view, the strategy adopted for the attainment of these objectives by West Africans was the same. The main objectives were three: to regain their independence and sovereignty, which implied expelling the colonialrulers altogether; to seek to correct or redress certain specific abuses or oppressive aspects of the colonial system; or to seek accommodation within it. The strategy that was adopted during this phase was neither submission nor alliance but that of resistance and this took many forms: revolts or rebellions, migrations, strikes, boycotts, petitions and delegations and finally ideological protest. The leadership during this period also remained virtually the same as that between 1880 and 1900, that is mainly that of the traditional rulers. Briefly let us illustrate each of these strategies."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14", "content": "The most popular weapon used by West Africans during this period was rebellion or revolt. Notable among rebellions was that led by Mamadou Lamine in Senegal between 1885 and 1887; that led by Fode Silla, the marabout king of Kombo; and Fode Kabba, the Muslim ruler of Niamina and the Casamance districts in The Gambia between 1898 and 1901 ; the Hut Tax rebellion of 1898 in Sierra Leone led by Bai Bureh; the Asante rebellion of 1900 in the Gold Coast led by Yaa Asantewaa, the queen of Edweso; the Ekumeku rebellion of 1898-1900 and the Aro rising between 1898 and 1902 in eastern. Nigeria; the rebellions of the Bariba of Borgu and the Somba of Atacora in Dahomey between 1913 and 1914; the Mossi rebellions in Koudougou and Fada N'Gurma in Upper Volta from 1908 to 1914; that of the Gurunsi in 1915-16; that of the Lobi and the Djoula in French Sudan between 1908 and 1909; the uprising in Porto Novo in Dahomey; the revolts of the Baule, Akouse, Sassandra and the Guro in Ivory Coast between 1900 and 1914; and the numerous uprisings in several parts of Guinea between 1908 and 1914. It is interesting to note that these rebellions increased in intensity during the First World War. 56 Three typical examples which must be looked at in a little detail to illustrate the nature and motives of these revolts are the rebellion led by Mamadou Lamine, the Hut Tax rebellion, and the Yaa Asantewaa rebellion."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14 > The rebellion of Mamadou Lamine", "content": "The rebellion of Mamadou Lamine was directed against foreign domina\u203a tion. The Soninke population was scattered among the various states com\u203a prising the territory of Upper Senegal. Some of them were by 1880 more or less subjected to French authority, the others to that of Ahmadu. Construction work on the telegraph line and the Kayes-Niger railway line required large numbers of workers, recruited principally among the Soninke. The exhausting labour and the precarious living conditions which were their lot caused a high death rate among them. As a result, a move\u203a ment of protest arose directly not only against the daily humiliations butespecially against foreign presence in the region.$^{57}$ Mamadou Lamine acted as a catalyst to this movement by grouping around him all the past or present victims of the new socio-political order. It was with the envied title of pilgrim that he returned, in 1885, to his homeland, then in the throes of a triple crisis, at once political, economic and social. In his first public sermons, he applied himself to transferring the crisis to a religious plane, favouring the strict San\u00fcsiyya doctrine, which refused to permit Muslims to live under any non-Islamic authority. That was enough to bring about the spontaneous adherence of the Soninke to his programme. His travels in Khasso, Guoy, Bambuck and Bondu daily saw new numbers of his countrymen rally to the cause. By the end of 1885, he had imposing forces at his disposal, ready to go to battle for freedom."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14 > The rebellion of Mamadou Lamine", "content": "The death of Boubacar Saada, the Almamy of Bondu and a French protege, provided him with the opportunity to launch his offensive. Omar Penda, imposed by France as the late Almamy's successor, refused to grant Mamadou Lamine permission to pass through Bondu on his way to The Gambia. The Soninke chief thereupon invaded Bondu in January 1886. Frey, who was on the Niger, dispatched contingents to Kayes and Bakel to secure his rear. Mamadou Lamine then gave his movement a radical turn. His sermons thereafter concerned only total war against Christians.$^{58}$ The Soninke condemned the French as well as their African allies such as Omar Penda of Bondu, Sambala of Medina and the farmers established in Bakel, Medina and Kayes. Some Soninke in French service joined Mamadou Lamine's camp while others established in the French posts furnished him with information concerning French troop movements."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14 > The rebellion of Mamadou Lamine", "content": "Against the superior weaponry of the enemy, Mamadou Lamine could count on the numerical superiority and fanaticism of his soldiers, who were convinced they were fighting for God and their country. After his defeat at Bakel, he resorted to guerrilla warfare. In March 1886, Mamadou Lamine decided to attack Bakel, which symbolized the French presence in the area and the humiliation of the Soninke people. He established a blockade of the city, occupying all its approaches with troops. When Captain Jolly attempted to loosen his grip by attacking the Soninke based at Koungani, he was forced to beat a hasty retreat, leaving ten dead and a cannon on the scene. Mamadou Lamine thereupon stormed the city with his 10000 men. The assault failed. With victory but a hair's breadth away, the Soninke headquarters was wiped out by a shell. In the confusion which followed, Mamadou Lamine's warriors fled.$^{59}$ Never\u203a theless, on his orders, the telegraph line between Bakel and Kayes was cut."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14 > The rebellion of Mamadou Lamine", "content": "The experience at Bakel taught Lamine that with the weapons at hisdisposal, he would never be able to seize fortified French posts. He there\u203a fore took to guerrilla warfare. Frey, who had returned from Niger, terrorized the populations of Guidimakha to wean them away from Mamadou Lamine's cause. Their villages were burned, their crops and livestock confiscated. That policy only strengthened the Soninke in their determina\u203a tion to rid their country of the French. Mamadou Lamine devoted the rainy season of 1886 to reorganizing his forces. He set up his headquarters at Diana in Upper Gambia, where he erected a fortress that became a centre of propaganda and a base of operations. In July, the Soninke attacked Senoudebou, reconquered Boulebane and executed Omar Penda, the French protege of Bondu.$^{60}$ After 1887, the alliance between Gallieni and Ahmadu against the Soninke precipitated the failure of the uprising. Souaibou, Mamadou Lamine's son, attacked by Ahmadu's army, was forced to surrender Diafounou and Guidimakha to the son of Al Hadj 'Umar. While attempting to rejoin his father, he was captured and executed. In December 1887, Lamine was finally defeated at Touba-Kouta by the French with the help of the auxiliaries furnished by Moussa Molo of the Upper Casamance."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14 > The Hut Tax rebellion", "content": "The Hut Tax rebellion of 1898 was the response of the Temne and the Mende of Sierra Leone to the consolidation of British rule over them by the appointment of district commissioners, the expansion of the frontier police, the abolition of the slave trade and slavery, the implementation of the Protectorate Ordinance of 1896 which empowered the government to dispose of waste land and, finally, the imposition of a tax of 5s a year on all two-roomed houses and 10s on all larger houses in the Pro\u203a tectorate.$^{61}$ All the Temne chiefs unanimously decided not to pay the tax and rose up in rebellion under the leadership of one of them, Bai Bureh (see Plate 6.4). They were joined by the Mende people thereby involving almost three-quarters of the Protectorate. The rebel forces attacked and looted trading stations and killed British officials and troops and all those suspected of assisting the colonial government. As one district commissioner reported in April 1898, 'The object appears to be the massacre of all Sierra Leoneans (i.e. the Creoles of Freetown) and Europeans and thoroughly it is being done. The country is destroyed as regards Trade - several traders being killed and places burnt'.$^{62}$ By May 1898, the rebel armies were within about 40 km of Freetown and two companies of troops had to be hastily brought in from Lagos to defend the town."}
{"document_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914", "full_section_title": "African initiatives and resistance in West Africa, 1880-1914 > African Reactions and Responses in West Africa, 1900-14 > The Hut Tax rebellion", "content": "What was the true nature of this revolt? The British governor of Sierra"}
